of working with 23 sabbatical and other
postdoctoral level people from throughout many
different countries and different states and and
that that meant that that we had people coming in
working normally on their own support or at least
mostly on their own support and And they had
maturity and motivation. And that made research a
lot more fun. We could have research group
meetings with people who had worked in South
Africa or worked in Saudi Arabia or worked in
Indiana. And that,
I think, is the synergism of putting research and
teaching together and development of these
books, all told, close to 3,000 pages of published
books. that I've edited and written a significant
part of, but certainly not a major part of. As you
began here, did anybody, whether you invited them
to or not, did anybody give you any advice, any
directions? Morris Bloodworth was a very I'd say
friendly and open type of administrator.
I remember talking to him about the fact that,
well, there was always a need for more money. And I
said, what about writing proposals? And he said,
well, that's the icing on the cake. And he
encouraged it. But being a large estate as it is and
as many problems that we have, and fortunately
have had reasonable support within the state, and
trying to grow as we have, well, that wasn't such a
big issue. But as far as him telling me I should work
on this or that, he was not very inclined to do that.
I think that he brought things to our attention by
these meetings that we had, whether they were at
Beaumont or Lubbock or somewhere else. And these
people all around us, occasionally Godfrey would
come in with some new observation from the field
that was stimulating. And of course, when we went
out in the state we always looked at the local crops
and the local soils and this gave us quite a bit of
stimulus and exposure. Was there any area of the
state that you soon realized needed more than its
proportional share of attention? It seemed like
that Overton had a high priority at that time. They
had the deep, sandy soils there, but the soil test,
chemical soil test, didn't jibe with the
response of the plants. And they asked me to come
and look at the situation with them and had a grad
student that had just started his master's degree
with me named Frank Hans. And Frank wanted to go and
look at that as possible thesis work. So he went up
and worked one summer and I remember taking a truck
and a trailer with a backhoe on it and driving to
Overton to dig that soil pit. I don't know if I would
do that today or not, but it went very well and I was
really impressed when I got the backhoe to going in
the right direction and got the pit dug about two
meters deep And there stood the superintendent of
the station and other staff out. I think it was the
first time they had seen that soil two feet, two
meters deep. And what we could see right away that
the chemical soil test tested the upper foot of
soil or less and the roots of the plant were
extending down rather through the full two meters
of Bermuda grass roots so deeply. And we had a
chemical study and mineralogy study underway but
we learned a whole lot that one during that day just
from seeing the plant and the soil as they
interacted. So that was one of our first, and then
we published that work, and Frank Hans is now on our
faculty, as you probably are aware. He later got
his doctor's degree with Dr. Hosner, and he worked
at Texas Tech for a few years before he joined our
faculty here. Beaumont was in the rice producing
area, or it is, and they had some problems with the
brooding of rice in that submerged environment.
Iron toxicity can occur, and that,
they, they were wrestling with. So I had a student
from China, actually from Taiwan, Tsai Chin Chin.
Tsai came without any money, but he wanted to do a
master's degree. And he painted houses to make his
living. I couldn't support him at that point. And
he finally got a job at Beaumont in the summertime.
And then he really began to get into a master's
thesis on that. And what we found was that the rice
plant pumps the oxygen down into the root zone and
oxidizes the iron and it precipitates and forms a
red boundary around the roots of the rice. Well,
one of the questions was, is that a protective
boundary, a layer, and is that preventing the
phosphate from getting to the root and things like
that? That didn't prove to be the case, but in the
second phase of that work, we did find that those
varieties of rice that pumped the most oxygen down
were the best varieties. And they, in other words,
controlled the iron by oxidizing it and
precipitating it. So that was very stimulating
work. And that stimulated me to think about what
was happening when iron went from solution to
solid phase in a matter of weeks in the field, a very
short span of time. In 1982, I went to Arizona State
and did a sabbatical. And that is the national
facility supported by National Science
Foundation for high resolution electron
microscopy. And there were no soils people there
and very few geology types. It was a work group of
engineers, physicists, chemists, and a few
geologists. But they had this built around this
electron microscopy facility. So for that year, I
learned to use an advanced electron microscope,
and when I came back and looked at some of those
materials from Beaumont, I could, through that
instrument, identify the phases better than we'd
ever been able to do it before and characterize
them. And some were what we call amorphous or
non-crystalline, or close to that, and then some
were rather well crystalline. So those things
just supplemented each other growing out of that
study down there. And that work has created quite a
lot of attention because it was so challenging. We
had probably three different students or
postdocs to attempt to identify those poorly
ordered phases that formed in the soil and around
the roots of rice. And the fellow who eventually
solved it was a student who came as a postdoctoral
to us, and he's originally from a very remote part
of the world. and
what you might think would be an unpretentious
kind of person, but he turned out to be quite a
scholar. D.C. Golden is his name, and he's from Sri
Lanka, and he's now employed as a part of the Mars
program in NASA, at the Johnson Pace Flight Center
in Houston. As you were getting underway here,
were there any subjects or topics that by some
fashion you understood that those were kind of to
be left alone, don't waste time on them or don't do
that?
I really can't recall being pushed around at all. I
think we always had so many possibilities. And
now, I would say perhaps one way of looking at that
question, there are so many problems that, one,
they have to be approached with such delicacy
sometimes that we learn fairly early on to be
rather careful about attacking a problem without
giving it quite a lot of thought because the
conditions, like around the rice roots, many
times we made some steps forward, but we were not
able to go completely to understanding the system
more thoroughly until we got different
instrumentation. When I got back from
sabbatical,
We had a head of our electron microscopy center,
Carl Duffner. He was hired after I returned from
Arizona, and fortunately for he and I, he was
trained as Arizona in the same institute where I
did my sabbatical. That's purely a coincidence.
He was an Aggie, and he had gotten his early
training here in chemistry. and he went out there
for his doctoral work. Well, he and I chose the
microscope, the 2010 microscope that we have and
that I've used for the last 18 years or longer, and
he used, too. So those things complemented our
work here and sort of came together. And now, of
course, we're undergoing a new evolutionary
stage in the Micro Center. trying to expand it
further. And in fact, Maya serving on the chairman
of the committee of the Users Committee for
Electron Microscopes through many years was a
very stimulating experience. And I'd say I got
dealing with Abe Clearfield in chemistry and
others through that medium that has been a
distinct asset throughout my studies here. In
your first months, semesters, years, what did you
learn? There were any kind of general guidelines
for the department? How were you expected to
dress? Were there any things in your spare time you
weren't supposed to do? Any organizations to join
or not join?
I always felt rather free. We always had a an
unwritten dress code, I think. I don't have on a
necktie today. In those days, I think I always had
on a necktie. And I had that shaken a bit. We had a
special meeting at Stanford University at the
Synchrotron facility they have out there some
years ago. And I found that when I went there, I was
perhaps the only person on the campus that had on a
necktie. Well, I thought the people at Stanford
were doing very well without the neckties, and
it's pretty warm in Stanford and pretty warm here,
and maybe we could get along just as well without
them so much here. But actually the only relaxing
that's ever been given in terms of instruction is
in the College of Agriculture, and life sciences,
Friday is considered to be an informal, more
informal day. And if we choose to wear blue jeans,
then we can wear them then and things like that.
About when did that begin? Not very many years ago.
I would say something like five years ago. Was
there a formal, was that written down? That was
written down. It was, okay. I think that
definitely came under our present dean. I think I
remember Ed Heiler's memo saying that with good
discretion, you may dress informally on Friday.
In your first years, normally what were the hours
that it was expected you were to be on campus? Get
here by what time and stay at least until? Well, the
College of Agriculture has, so far as I know, has
always been rather eight to five-ish. And I've
always enjoyed my work, and I've always been here
at least that long, and usually a bit longer, and do
a significant amount of work on the weekends. And
the advent of the computer has really extended
work. And I know a few years ago, I tell students
occasionally in jest that The main discovery I've
made in recent years, and I was at that point trying
to get one of these books out, the main discovery
I've made has been Saturday and Sunday. Because
when you undertake these books and you're working
with dozens of authors from around the world, it
just takes a lot more time than one would probably
anticipate.
In those early days, Ridge Park, Parked right
beside the building, yes, yes. And normally was
there a departmental, was there a coffee pot in
your building? Where did you get? Oh, that always
seemed to take care of itself. There always seemed
to be a coffee pot nearby. Oddly enough, coffee
without pie doesn't go very well for me, so I've
never been an ardent coffee drinker. When I was at
Auburn, it was very structured informally.
People gathered twice a day, I think, to drink
coffee. Certainly they gathered in the morning.
But I was an oddity. I just couldn't be
comfortable. When I drank that coffee, that took
up too much of my day. So I was a little bit
rebellious. In those years, where did you lunch?
I've been a brown bag person so long that I have a
hard time remembering when I wasn't a brown bag
person. Did you eat your brown bag lunch in your
office by yourself or with a group? Well, I usually
eat it with the group today and I, well, I say, no,
that's, you have to, one has to think about that in
context of the building. And we really didn't have
Honestly, I can't remember exactly where we ate
our lunch when I was in the old state chemist
building.
Was there a group that ate together? There has been
a group that gathered from time to time throughout
my career here, and some even played bridge in the
noon hour. I didn't happen to fit very well into
that. But we do a lot of visiting during the noon
hour, yes. We have in the past, and we do even today.
And some of it is across departmental lines, but
mostly it's within the department and mostly
among soil scientists. Did people smoke in their
office in those days? I'm sure that some did. I grew
up in a tobacco patch in western Kentucky, and I had
a distinct prejudice against tobacco and all of
its products. So I've always stayed on the
fringes. But yes, we did, unfortunately, have to
smell somebody smoke occasionally. But that
wasn't much of a problem. You know, when people
realized that I didn't smoke, they were rather
courteous about not smoking around me. All right.
talking about your initial impressions. You got
here in the summer. Yes. And that fall, what was
your impression then when the students came and
football and all the traditions? Describe that
for a newcomer from Kentucky. Well, it was a bit
overwhelming, and I guess we were mostly
stimulated by it, and we did participate in it to a
significant extent. I don't think it was as well
developed in those days as it is now as far as the,
you know, since Rudder Center has been built, our
social atmosphere has been enhanced enormously.
And we enjoy that and appreciate that. In those
days, I remember gathering in that old Guyon Hall,
I guess it was, and hearing President Rutter read a
speech to us. And I might say, one of the highlights
of not coming to Texas A&M that I always remember
was that whenever Dr. Rutter, not Dr. Rutter, but
President Rutter, had a banquet for the new
faculty, And he said very deliberately, if you see
anything that you want to do at Texas A&M and
there's anybody standing in your way and you still
want to pursue this, you come and tell me about it,
please. All right, your impression, describe
your whole impression of Earl Rudder. Well, he was
big in more than physical form to me. We had
several, Martha and I had several fortunate
interactions with the Rutters. The first Sunday I
think we were in church at A&M United Methodist
Church, we chose a position in the pews that looked
like it was sort of a little bit toward the front,
next to the center aisle, and we sat there. And then
later, someone told us, said, did you know that
President and Mrs. Rutter normally sit at that
position? Well, we moved a bit. but not too far. And
so we continued to sit somewhere in that vicinity.
And I would say on numerous occasions we would look
down the bench or across the bench to see Mrs.
Rutter and President Rutter. And we always held
him and Mrs. Rutter in very high regard. because
they were so nice to us. And even today, whenever
Mrs. Rudder sees my wife, she calls her by her first
name. And when we were in France, we went to the
Normandy coast and saw the site where
our president had led a military assault on that.
How much did you as a faculty member in those early
years, how much presence did Mr. Rudder have? Did
you see him much? I'd say, to me, he was very
visible. Of course, I saw him. I drove by his house
every day going home, and I saw him very frequently
on Sunday. He
wasn't, I would say, so very visible on the campus.
Otherwise, because I have rather imagine he was
awfully busy in his own office. What image do you
think that he had, the faculty had of him? Well, I
think that all of us who came in under his, like I did
while he was the president, I think we held him in
very high regard. And a bit in awe because we knew
that he did not have an academic background, but
Yet he had high visions, and that's what put him in a
high place as far as I was concerned. He was not
impeded by what many other people guarded so much.
Then come on down in administrative order, the
Vice President of Academic Affairs, as we then
called it, when you got here. Was Wayne Hall still
in that role? I think so. I remember that name, yes.
And then Zener. Who was Dean of Agriculture? Oh.
Was it Patterson or, oh, ta-ta-ta-ta-ta-ta. I
see. Before, well, it would have been Kunkel.
Kunkel was dean during much of my tenure here.
Describe him as dean, his manner, his style. What I
liked about Kunkel was that every year when we had
our January planning meeting for the Experiment
Station personnel, which we still have today, he
was very scholarly. in his presentations, and
that I appreciated. It seemed to me that he held a
high standard in the science and the
scholarliness with which he presented subject
matter. I always thought he had a good vocabulary
and presented himself well. Now, of course, I had
quite a lot of interaction with Neville Clark, and
I thought he was a good, strong leader. Neville
was? Director of the Experiment Station.
There were several other support people over
there, Vic Schimber and so on, that we had some
interaction with, but the dean and the Experiment
Station director were the two major ones. And I
would say that as I think about a university now,
looking back versus as an employee and growing up
professionally, it seems to me that the
administration is a lot more separate when beyond
the department level than I would have expected it
to be. And thus, the faculty, I think, tends to
expect
a bit of interaction and perhaps a bit of counsel,
although they're not looking for exactly
instruction.
As I view it now, the dean and the director of the
Experiment Station, and more now than before, the
department head, is so heavily committed to other
directions that he doesn't have much time to look
at the faculty and interact with them. We are
evaluated every year, and I think that's good.
When that first initiated, it was like other
evaluations. We looked at it with a bit of
suspicion, but it turns out to be a good thing for
everybody. And I think that's one of the stronger
administrative aspects of the way the College of
Agriculture is run. I would say if, on the other
hand, we would like to have the whole
administration evaluated, as we are evaluated,
and we would like for that to be available in some
summary form so we would see Faculty don't
complain very much in my area. I couldn't register
very many things. That one few complaints I've
ever heard and I heard time and time again is that we
would like to know what
the administration does because it seems like
through the years we've seen an increase in number
of administrators and we've seen a decline in
number of faculty and a number of support staff.
And we would like to think that in the best interest
of everyone, we should be able to evaluate the
efficiency of all parties. And that should be
rather freely open information. Again, back to
the early days, Were there any hints or anything
about whether anyone could,
their social activities, that one is not to ever be
seen drinking public, one is never to ever play
poker, one is never to go to this place? Were there
any guidelines that you understood from
anywhere? Not that I'm aware of. You know, that
could be that some were, but I wasn't. All right,
now, this is way, way, way back. I asked that of Fred
Benson a long time ago. And he said when they first
got here, you never, and they were living on
campus, you were, yeah, this is an editorial note.
This is a conversation with Fred Benson who later
was a great dean of engineering. He said that when
he and his wife first got here, it was made very
clear to them that you never served alcoholic
beverage unless you had the shades and the blinds
closed. and that if you played poker for money, you
also closed the blinds, and that under no
circumstances did you ever serve alcoholic
beverage if there were any students present, that
whether it was a faculty student group, there was
to be no alcohol ever served, and that he said it was
clearly understood that one was expected to go to
worship services pretty regularly. Didn't
matter what your denomination, whether
Protestant, Catholic, Jewish, but you were to go.
All right, but now, end of the note. In those early
years, were you ever teased by not being an Aggie or
not being a native Texan? Did that seem to matter at
all? No, I really never felt that way. In fact, I can
tell you sort of personally that I always felt that
I was particularly appreciated because I chose to
come to Texas A&M. And I can't tell you that that was
by my peers especially, and in fact by some that
were just friends that I had met here locally who
were on the faculty in other departments. And so I
would say quite the contrary. I think that the
faculty here was very receptive and they didn't
They didn't try to bring me into line with all the
Aggie trappings particularly. As you met your
first classes and had your first graduate
students, how did Aggie students compare with
Auburn and Wildcat students at UK?
This has been a real exciting place to teach and
it's kind of hard to generalize because the course
that I've taught and taught consistently soil
mineralogy to graduate students was taken by
civil engineers, oceanographers, geologists,
soil scientists, occasional ag engineers, and
occasionally rain science. and those are
students with rather diverse backgrounds and
it's difficult and this is a foundation course in
soil science so I usually get students who just
arrived from Taiwan or from from Houston or
wherever, early in their programs. And this would
be as graduate students? Yes, as graduate
students, but as beginning, early on graduate
students. And so sometimes they had particular
linguistic difficulty, in a few cases certainly.
And the ones in civil engineering have a very
different background from those from soil
science or...